Ref: Biophysics: Searching for Essentials by W. Bialek, 2012. More info in readme. These are preliminary notes. I have raw notes under Nonlinear Systems folder also. 

### Chapter 3: Lessons, Problems, and Principles:
1. Photon counting in vision - eg of a real biological phenomenon that is reproducible and quantitative, as with physics experiments, under well defined experimental conditions to get the needed precision. the total rod current in the dark ~ 20 pA; response to a single photon ~ 1 pA; and continuous background noise ~ 0.1 pA, due to tiny modulations of the cell's biochemical activity. 
2. Performance of these biological systems is determined by the physics of the problem that the system has been selected to solve; Expose this with real-world extreme cases: respond to every individual photon, in the dark; and provide spatio-temporal discrimination - not an aggregate recognition. 
3. Properties of the system - and rationale behind them:  Single rods have nonlinear filters vs ganglion cells where spatio-temporal specificity will decide the level of aggregate behavior of summation before application of the sigmoid; In the brain, one can find neighboring cells that are broadly of the same type but have made slightly different choices about almost all the relevant parameters; There may be many different combinations of microscopic parameters that lead to the same phenomenological parameters - but this casts doubt on 'one explanation'; Rods - with individual nonlinearity and filter characteristics - yield near-optimal performance. Evolution has selected the best solution to to a problem that is essential to the life of the organism. This does not tell how the optimum was reached, but can predict the observable behavior of the system; There are many objections to the previous ('inductive'?) approach. This is known - there are many different ideas in theoretical physics that can be formulated as variational principles (e.g., least action in classical mechanics and minimization of free energy in equilibrium thermodynamics). "Biological system maximizes X": Deine the criteria to be more predictive and meaningful: Why X can't be arbitrarily large - need a theory to define physical limits to performance; measure X and compare it to the theoretical maximum; maximizing X should generate some predictions (on structure and dynamics) that can be tested in independent quantitative experiments. This strategy of finding X by variational principles may not succeed. May have picked the wrong X,but may also be because X may not be maximized or optimized. Alternative to variational principles - directly look at dynamics. eg., dynamics of evolution. The current genome is the evolutionary fit mutation. Organisms climb slowly up the 'fitness gradient' accumulating beneficial mutations (Evolutionary dynamics is an active area of research). 
4. Evolution, along with learning and adaptation, are processes that biological systems use t adjust their parameters to be more effective, or more fit, in their environment. The system relaxes to its new steady state with a power law time dependence (no single time scale). Effective mutation rates are reduced by proofreading mechanisms; beyond SNPs, there are also recombination events, gene duplications, and (modular assembly of multiple glycans - my addition), that are involved in both dynamics of evolution and (current) adaptation and learning. X maximized - the system has maximized its reliability in the presence of noise or minimized the effective noise level until only the physically required noise remains significant. 
5. Biological systems have been selected to maximize their tolerance to parameter variation (my comment: explore aggregation, robustness, and feedback control). 
6. Flow of information is important in biology: (my note - feedback and optimization); evolutionary information storage in the genome; there is physical cost to transmitting info (Shannon's theorem - statistical mechanics); there are information theoretic analogs for biological principle of maximizing performance at fixed source coostt. There are clear physical limits and experiments show that these limits are approached in many real systems, across a range of biological phenomena. He builds a framework: single cells to learning and prediction in the brain. 

### Chapter 7:Outlook
1. A principle: Noise is not negligible. Biological systems approach fundamental physical limits to their noise performance at detection, discrimination, and estimation tasks. They can suppress extraneous sources of noise and make more efficient use of available signals from the outside world (in sensory processing). The organism has control over the scale of the signal - in modulating the concentation of transcription factors, and yet approach physical limits to signaling. Need to demonstrate this to complex tasks. Not just a problem for theory: need experiments in a natural extent and provide quantitative characterization of what organisms are doing in these complex situations. Is is a huge challenge. 
2. Not yet a principle: No fine tuning. Expermients demonstrate the robustness of biological function to variations in parameters. Flexibility is impressive. But genuinely random choices do not lead to biological function. We can ensure parameter insensitivity by arranging for biological functions to be topological rather than geometrical features of the underlying dynamics. Apparent fragility in one layer is a hint that another layer of control (or learning or adaptation) compensates. He explores models that are explicitly as random as possible while satisfying certain constraints, and they work. 
3. A principle: Efficient representation. From Shannon's theorem on entropy, he shows limits on how much information can be transmitted and on minimal information required to perform a certain task. Several biological systems approach these limits. Consequences: Distribution of expression levels for a genet to a variety of filters found in the inner ear. It subsumes goal-directed behavior from search to learning a model of the environment. More than just minimizing noise. There are ways of attaching values to bits and eventually performance metrics. Dynamic range found in real world. Understand the natural context. Context matters. 

### Chapter 6: Efficient Representation
