I provide here summary of three reference books on this topic:
1. Introduction to Molecular Biophysics, by J.A. Tuszynski and M Kurzynski, CRC Press, 2003 and
2. Biophysical Principles of Structure and Function, by F.M. Snell, S. Shulman, R.P. Spencer, and C. Moos, Addison-Wesley, 1965.
3. Biophysics: Searching for Principles, by William Bialek, Princeton University Press, 2012

They help us see a continuum of old concepts and evolution of new concepts. Water and Polysaccharides are still covered in the newer reference as fundamental building blocks, but not as rigorously as Proteins and Nucleic Acid. The newer reference also mentions nonlinear phenomenon (".. life is a strongly nonlinear and nonequilibrium phenomenon."), albeit at the end of the book. The newer book's publication also coincided with resurgence of nonlinear phenomenon and scaling theories as research topics. Research interest today (in 2018) seems to be focused on genomic studies to identify genetic and genomic links to complex diseases (in our case, cardiovascular diseases). Yield has not been particularly significant which may signal a fundamental turn to reconsider the more recently ignored perspectives. I will attempt to summarize information on all the biophysical aspects, in the hope of developing better unified theories to understand molecular roles in disease processes. The utlimate goal is to relate them to measurable and sensitive noninvasive biomarkers.

Prof. Bialek's book is focused on extracting general principles in biology. A 2010 NYTimes [article](https://www.nytimes.com/2010/11/02/science/02angier.html?pagewanted=all) article discusses this perspective. Prof. Bialek and Dr. Todorov are interviewed there. One of the 3 principles that he focuses on in the book: signal to noise ratio (SNR) under extreme conditions. Rods in the eye are shown to be sensitive to individual photons with a SNR of 10, and coupled with individualized sigmoidal transfer function (as with CMOS switches in VLSI), provides a reliable output even in the dark. The system is shown to be evolutionarily the best it could have been, given the realities of the physical world. I  have summarized  Chapters 3 and 7 first, where Prof. B surveys his work and comments on future potential. I will summarize later the three other chapters on the basic principles that he explores. 
