From "Biophysical Principles of Structure and Function", by Snell et al., Addison-Wesley, 1965. This write-up covers other molecules also. 

**Water**: Absence of water ends all the processes associated with the living state. It posesses unique properties essential for life. Fig. 4.1 in their book compares melting point, boiling point, and molal heat of vaporization for water and other dihydrides (H<sub>2</sub>S, H<sub>2</sub>Se, H<sub>2</sub>Te). But for water, there is a trend for all of them to decrease with molecular weight. HF and NH<sub>3</sub> have similar behaviors too. Figure 4.2 compares such substances with the same number of electrons per molecule (or isoelectronic series). In this series (Ne, HF, H<sub>2</sub>2O, NH<sub>3</sub>, and CH<sub>4</sub>), water has the highest values for all three thermal properties. Table 4.1 compares Heat of vaporization (cal/gm), Specific heat capacity (cal/gm-deg), Surface tension (erg/cm<sup>2</sup>), Dielectric constant (esu), and Viscosity (millipoises) of water at various temperatures (0 to 100 degree celsius) with various liquides (e.gs, Ammonia, Methyl alcohol, Formic acid, Acelaldehyde, Pyridine, Chloroform). All values for water are much higher (only Ammonia's specific heat capacity is a bit higher). Specific heat capacity is the number of calories of heat required to raise the temperature of one g of a substance by one degree celsius. For normal life processes, a relative constant temperature is needed. The matabolic processes of life continually generate heat; but metabolizing tissues have 70-80% water with its high heat capacity. From Table 4.1, if the body were composed of an alcohol instead of water, the temperature rise would be almost double (Specific heat capacity values of 0.6 for methyl alcohol vs 1 for water). Water also has a high heat of vaporization (> 2 x vs methly alcohol; even higher vs others). A smaller amount of water can dissiplate a considerable amount of heat. Vaporization of 1g of water relieves the organism of >500 cal of heat.  2g --> 1000 cal. Sp. heat = 1 cal/gm-deg. So, for ~1 Kg  of body weight,  1 deg increase will occur with 1000 cal expenditure. However, 2g water loss (out of 1000 g) by vaporization will keep the temperature same. Other common organic liquids are at best only half as effective. *Actually, the evaporation of water is the most important physiological mechanism of heat dissipation for the human body*. Other properties are important too: Surface tension arises out of the differences in the intermolecular bonds in the interior of a liquid compared to those on the surface taht are attached on one side. Higher surface area --> more such molecules unattached. Amount of energy consumed per unit area is higher for water by  a factor of  3 to 4. High surface tension of water is vital for the formation of films of lipid and protein which comprise the cellular membranes. ** See summaries of lipids and cell structure below to understand this**. High dielectric constant makes water a very effective solvent of ionic substances, since the strength of the ionic bonds is so greatly reduced that ionic crystals become unstable. Most biochemical reactions take place in water solution. 

Physical properties of various liquids:

|Substance    |Heat of Vap   | Sp. heat  | Surf. tension| Dielect. const| Viscosity  |
|-------------|:------------:|:---------:|:------------:|:-------------:|:----------:|
| Units       |cal/gm        | cal/gm-deg| erg/cm* cm   | esu           | millipoises|
|Water, 0 C   | 596          | 1.009     | 75.64        |  88           | 17.92      |
|Water, 100 C | 540          | 1.006     | 58.85        |  48           |  2.84      |
|Methyl Alcohl| 262          | 0.6       | 22.6         |  33           |  5.93      |
|Chloroform   |  61          | 0.234     | 27.1         |   5.1         |  5.63      |

**Polysaccharides**: Most are built from one (homopolymer) or a few (heteropolymer) monosacchs (vs proteins which may contain all 20 AAs). Can be longer than proteins and polynucleotids, but do not form hydrogen bonds - hence their structure is more random in solution vs hydrogen-bonded chains. Many polysacchs occur free (cellulose, chitin, starch (amylose and amylopectin), glycogen - a storage form of carbs in animals). They also chemically bond with other molecules: connective tissue where polysacchs and protein form an intercellular mesh. Nucleic acid may be considered a type of polysacch because of the repeating ribose or deoxyribose molecules. Aldehyde and ketone are the monosacch building blocks. All carbs have a structural arrangement similar to L-glyceraldehyde or to D-glyceraldehyde (depending upon the direction of rotation of polarized light that is passed throus the carbs in an aqueous solution. D - clockwise; L- anticlockwise. Synthetic materials have equal mixes and do not cause any net rotation. Such mixtures are called 'racemic' (or optically inactive). Biological system, however, show great specificity in their syntheses, producing either the *d*- or *l*-forms, but not both. biologic systems often are stereoscpecific in their reactions. They will react with one of the steric isomers, but much less with opposite isomer. The monosacchs are joined into long chain polymers by means of glycosidic bonds; these, like peptide linkages, are anhydro - water is split off between two molecules. The disacchs are named as per whether the glycosidic linkage is alpha or beta. Man and most other animals **do not posess** enzymes capable of hydrolyzing the β-1,4 glycosidic linkages found in cellulose. Thus, cellulose, although composed of glucose, is useless as food material for most animals (Cows have bacteria that can split and digest cellulose). The **commonest disacchs** are maltose (glucose-glucose), sucrose (glucose-fructose), and lactose (galactose-glucose). These disacchs are models of polysacchs - they indicate union of monosacchs to form complex units. Man has specific disaccharases (enzymes for splitting disacchs to monosacchs) for all three: maltase, sucrase, and lactase. In addition to these simple monosacchs, there are other building blocks that are involved in polymer formation - they are electrically charged at biological pH values. Egs. D-glucuronic acid, D-galactosamine, D-glucosamine-N-sulfate, with respective pK values of 3.3, 7.8, and <1. *Polysacchs*: See table below for the most common ones in biological systems. 

| Polysacch     | Subunits                                | Linkages   | Biological properties            |
|---------------|:---------------------------------------:|:----------:|:--------------------------------:|
|Agar           |D-galactose, L-galactose, Sulfuric acid  |   ? (1965) | swells on exposure to moisture   |
|Amylopectin    | Glucose                                 | 96% α-1,4  | a plant starch: food for us      |
|Amylose        | Glucose                                 | α-1,4      | a plant starch; food for us      |
|Pneumococcal   | Glucose and Glucuronic acid             | ?          | Certain subset are antigenic     |
|Cellulose      | Glucose                                 | β-1,4      | Structural constituent of plants |
|Chitin         | N-acetyl-D-glucosamine                  | β-1,4      | Main part of insect exoskeleton  |
|Chondr. Sulfate| N-acetyl... and glucuronic acid         | β-1,4 (?)  | Connective tissue component      |
|Glycogen       | Glucose                                 | 91% α-1,4  | liver and muscle storage of carbs|
|Heparin        | D-glucosamine-... and glucuronic acid   | α-1,4 (?)  | prevents blood clotting; in liver|
|HA             | N-acetylglucosamine and glucuonic acid  | β-1,4      | Component of connective tissue   |
|Pectins        | Galacturonic acid                       | ?          | Found in fruits; jelly in canning|

**Lipids**:

**Cell Structure**: Consider a hypothetical cell of spherical shape with a radius of 20 μ. Volume of the cell = 4/3π r3 = 3.4 x 10-8 cm3. Surface area = 4πr2 = 5 x 10-5 cm2. This cell is approximately 80% water. Of the remaining material, about 70% is protein. Consider this in terms of the number of molecules involved. A Kg of cells would contain 800 g of water, or 44.4 moles (molecular weight of water = 18 g/mole). Say proteins had a mean molecular weight of 500. there would be 200 g/500 g = 0.4 mole. Hence each mole of protein within the cell is in the vicinity of 44.4 moles/0.4 mole or 111 molecules of water. Cellular activities can thus be understood only in terms of an appreciation of water structure and function. Various cells can produce > 750 enzymes (The number in 1965). These enzymes catalyze metabolic events involving thousands of organic compounds. These events typically occur under constant temperature and pressure.  Cells differ significantly in their composition (egs: lipid engorged adipose cells and protein-rich secretary cells of the alimentary mucosa; length to width may be 1:1 vs 100:1 in neural cells). But there is much commonality. The non-aqueous parts (20% of wet weight): 14% protein, 2% lipids, 2% RNA, 1% DNA, and 1% polysaccharide. Selective influx into the cell: AA, glucose, lipids, vitamins, minerals, water, oxygen. Efflux: Carbon dioxide, degradation products. The average membrane is 10 nm arranged as a sandwitch with 2.5 nm protein layers on both sides and an intermediate bimolecular lipid layer (7 nm). The hydrophilic portion of the lipids face the protein, while the hydrocarbon tails are close to each other. It has a potential difference of 40 mV and thus, an E value of 4 x 10<sup>6</sup> volts/cm. C is about 1 µF/cm<sup>2</sup>, and R is 1000 Ω/cm<sup>2</sup>. The dielectric constant is 11, much below that of water. See above. The nuceleus may occupy 10% to 100% of the cell. RBC lives 100 days on average, and does not have a nucleus and does not reproduce (nucelus is necessary for reproduction; not sufficient - mature muscle and nerve cells have nucleus, but do not reproduce). Part of the tortuous membrane protruding into the cell is ER. Attached to ER are microsomes which contain ribosomes (contain lipid, protein, and RNA, and are sites of protein synthesis). Mitochondria: In cytoplasm, 1 to 10 micron long rod-shaped structures. Three functions: fatty acid degradation; oxidation of pyruvate in the citric acid cycle (pyruvate is the principal metabolic product of glucose); and production of ATP from ADP (coupling of oxidation to phosphorylation). ATP is an energy-rich compound needed in the biosynthesis of proteins and other cellular components. Also the enery source for physical activities, such as muscle contraction. Cells are separated by 10 nm. Attractive (van der Waals) forces (proportional to second power of distance for cells, not 6th power) balance repulsive electric charge forces (proportional to log of distance) at this distance. Cell stability and adhesion are of interest (in 1965). The **intercellular cement** is rich in Ca++, amorphous material (sulfated mucopolysacchs), and fibers (collagen, a protein). **Collagen** is ubituitous (exception: nervous system) and has these characteristics: two principal AAs found in collagen are proline and hydroxyproline; it has three-stranded helix with hydrogen bonding (not 2 like elsewhere); collagen fibers aggregate together - pH and other factors influence - only three types of the asymmetric collagen molecule are possible - parallel with overlap; parallel without overlap; and antiparallel without overlap; and they lend rigidity to tissues. 

I have found a few relevant articles. Here is their summary and reference to them:

Szebeni et al. (1990) explored the reason for attenuation of the ultrasound signals in noninvasive diagnosis of chronic liver disease. they collected ultrasound and histopathology data on 89 patients (33 normals and 56 with disease). Water content could not explain the attenuation of the signal seen in patients with non-bright liver, as the water content difference was non-significant. No correlation was found between liver water content and histopathology either. 

Lewis articles in the Merck online reference manual: Water accounts for 50% to 66% of a person's weight. Fat tissue (vs lean tissue) has less water. Women have more fat - so the % of water in women is lower (52 to 55%) vs men (60%). TBW is also lower in older and obese people, higher (70%) at birth and early childhood. *A 154 pound (70 Kg) man has 10.5 gallons (42 liters) of water - 7 gallons (28 liters) intracellular, 2.5 gallons (10.5 liters) in extracellular spaces, and 1 gallon (3.5 liters) in the blood*. Healthy adults sshould drink 2 quarts (2 liters) of fluids per day. body is good at excreting excess water drank, but not at conserving water in case of limited intake. Water is primarily absorbed from the GI tract (also obtained from metabolic activities). Depending upon the body's needs, the Kidneys (the primary source of water removal) may excrete a pint or several gallons of urine per day. Profus sweating can significantly increase water loss through evaporation. The body works to keep the total amount of water and electrolyte levels constant. When the body is low in water, the *pituitary gland* secretes vasopressin (ADH) which stimulates the kidneys to conserve water and excrete less urine. Intracellular K and Na concns: 140 and 12 mEq/L, respectively. Extracellular: 3.5 to 5 and 140 mEq/L, respectively. *Osmotic forces*: The concentration of combined solutes in water is osmalarity (amount of solute per L of solution). Osmalality (amount of solute per Kg of solution) in units of mOsm/Kg is given as 2 * serum Na (in mEq/L) + 1/18 * Glucose (in mg/dL) + 1/2.8 * BUN (in mg/dL). Normal value: 275 to 290 mOsm/Kg. High Na (viz., salty food), high glucose (in diabetes), and high BUN (in kidney disease) increase osmalality.  Other osmatically active substances are alcohols, mannitol, and glycine. Water (not solutes) crosses cell membranes freely to equalize osmalality. Solutes that diffuse freely across the membrane (such as urea) have no osmotic activity. Na/K have restricted movement and contribute heavily to osmotic activity. Osmotic force can be opposed by other forces: plasma proteins have a small osmotic effect that tends to draw water into the plasma. Vascular hydrostatic forces force water out of the plasma. *There is twice as much water inside cells*. Water loss per day (in a 70 Kg person): 1.5 L from urine; 0.75 L from lungs and skin; with fever, 0.06 L/degree C increase. An increase of just 2% in plama osmalality can trigger thirst from hypothalamus.  

Basile et al., (2008) compared TBW estimated by two anthropometric equations (by Watson and Hume) with TBW obtained by BIA in 3625 normal caucasian men and women (1860 M and 1765 W) and 688 hemodialysis patients (443 M and 245 W). BIA used ) 0.8 mA, 50-KHz four electrode method. Pairs were matched for age, body weight, and height, and gender. TBW was the same amongst each of the genders (no difference for diseased vs normal subjects), when measured by anthropometic methods (obvious, but not elucidated by others in the past). This highlights the failure of such methods to estimate TBW. However, *R* from BIA was statistically different, showing that TBW is better measured with BIA. See table below:


| Group  | Gender   | Mean (in Ω) | SD (in Ω) | Significance  |
|--------|:---------|:-----------|:----------|:--------------|
| Disease| Male | 558 |80 | *P* <0.0001 for men|
| Normal | Male | 511| 58 | |
|Disease | Female| 615|100| *P* < 0.02 for women|nt
| Normal | Female| 593| 70|  |

The authors indicate that the BIA method has been well validated against meansurement of body fluid volume through isotome dilution in non-uraemic subjects. They use a BIA equation developed by Sun et al that uses gender, body weight and height, as the anthropometric equations do, but with the addition of *R*. 

Rosner and Gore (2001) discuss the errors involved in estimating the nutrient intake through FFQ (food frequency quetionnaire) or 24-hour recall. Weighted diet records  provide accurate assessments. They suggest the use of a validation study on a subset of individuals to ascertain the relation between the two methods. They also model disease incidence as a function of estimated diet record food (and nutrient) intake and apply prospectively these methods to breast cancer data from the Nurse's Health Study. They related breast cancer incidence from 1980 to 1994 to estimated sucrose and alcohol intake in 1980. Surcose intake is inversely associated with alcohol intake and alcohol is an established positive risk factor for breast cancer. OR for alcohol was 1.2+ (Quintile 5 vs Quintile 1, based on alcohol intake). 

Chan et al., (2002) considered whole blood η, plasma η, Hct, and Fibronogen as independent risk factors for CHD, which can be elevated by dehydration. Study group: 8,280 M and 12,017 W, ages 38-100 who were without heart disease, stroke, or diabetes at baseline in 1976. A total of 246 fatal CHD events occurred during the 6-year follow-up. High daily intakes of water (5 or more glasses) compared to low (<= 2 glasses) had a relative risk in men of 0.46 (95% CI: 0.25, 0.75, *P* < 0.001), and in women of 0.59 (95% CI: 0.36, 0.97). A high versus low intake of fluids other than water was associated with a relative risk of 2.47 (95% CI: 1.04, 5.88) in women and of 1.46 (95% CI: 0.7, 3.03) in men.  Adjustments for age, smoking, HT, BMI, education, and (in women) HRT, did not impact these results. Compared to the general population, this population drank more water, milk, and fruit juices and less coffee, tea, and carbonated and alcoholic beverages. They quote references that suggest that **blood η** is adversely affected by hypohydration and these rheologic factors  (η and Fibrinogen) predict the risk of CHD. The difference in blood η, although statistically significant, are only 2 to 7%. These are the range of change seen in mild, nonclinical hypohydration. The small elevation in blood η in the morning might be behind increased CHD then. Rationale behind other fluids' risk increase: Caffeine is a mild diuretic, increasing η. Juices and sodas have osmalalities of 556 to 836 mOsm/kg. This causes a net movement of fluid from the vascular system to the intestinal lumen, leading to increase in blood η. Serum TGL (triglyceride) is raised by sugary drinks. TGL increase after 2.7 glasses (640 ml) of grape juice and 3 glasses of OJ (750 ml) were 50% and 30% respectively. Even high normal TGL is a CHD  and thrombosis risk factor. *Men vs Women: Women have lower η due to lower Hct, RBC rigidity, and aggregability at all shear rates*.  

Impact on Alzheimer's disease: Dumont et al., (2017) and Ji et al., (2018) discuss this. Neuroinflammation impacts many neurological diseases including AD. Free water (FW) in (normal appearing) white matter (called relative FW or rFW here) , obtained from MRI imaging, was higher for subjects with greater cognitive impairments. MCI (mild cognitive impairment) and AD patients both had statistically significant high values relative to NC (normal controls), but not significantly different from each other. Pasernak et al., (2018) compared AD, amnestic MCI (aMCI) with healthy controls (NC). n = 39, 41, and 39, respectively. aMCI had widespread FW increases vs NC. FW was further increased in AD vs aMCI. FA<sub>t</sub> (fractional anisotropy) was reduced only in certain regions for aMCI, but was far more widespread for AD. 

Donaldson in a 1911 paper studied the effect of underfeeding on the brain of the albino rat. Underfeeding causes a slight decrease of the percentage of water in the brain (0.1% typically); underfeeding increases the percentage value of the ether-alcohol extract (a measure of myelin sheathing increase) - could also be due to destructive changes in the neurons caused by the underfeeding; underfeeding does not arrest medullation (the formation of a medullary sheath or medulla). Dean III et al., in a 2016 paper studied the myelin content in Parkinson's disease longitudinally in 63 participants (normals and PD patients) using MRI. Alterations to myelin may be a core pathological feature of neurodegenerative diseases. They used MRI to compare R<sub>1</sub>, R<sub>2</sub>, and **myelin water fraction, VF<sub>M</sub> (a surrogate for myelin content)** in individuals with PD compared to age-matched controls. VF<sub>M</sub> correlated well with daily use of Ldopa (anti-PD medication), a dopamine.    They found that alterations are related to the severity of clinical symptoms. PD subjects had higher VF<sub>M</sub> than controls in frontal and temporal white matter. **Greater age was associated with lower VF<sub>M</sub> in both groups**. A slower rate of decline was sugggested with aging in PD. Earlier studies imply that PD has complex effects on white matter microstructure and that it undergoes compensatory or neuroplastic changes during PD progression. Either PD or dompaminergic therapy reduce observed age-related myeline changes. *VF<sub>M</sub> may provide a surrogate marker for microstructural changes related to PD*. 

Well, et al., 2005, used deuterium dilution in 672 subjects (265 <1 year; 407 in ages 1 to 19) during 1990-2003. Previously published equations, based on data of 1970s, significantly overstimated TBW from 4% to 11%. Overestimation of TBW was greatest in infancy. Secular trends in the nutritional status of infants and children are altering the relation between age or weight and TBW. Figure 1 shows that TBW (in liters) increases linearly with age, increasing to 40 l at age 20. They undertook the study since many medicines and treatments are tailored to children's size on the basis of either body weight (most likely), predicted TBW, or predicted surface area. However, for dialysis dosagees, TBW  is the more important measure. Compared to US reference data of 1963-1975, they estimated that children in Cambridge (the study site) in 1990s were 23% (boys) and 35% (girls) fatter. This increase occursed parallel to a decrease in their lean mass, probably due to decreasing activity levels. Some of the fatness translates to a higher BMI, but fatness may increase even for the same BMI. They suggest the **TBW estimation is more sensitive vs other approaches to variability in body composition** and is more likely to improve clinicians' ability to tailor treatment to size. 

Brugnara (2000) studied RBC dehydration in sickle cell pathophysiology. Cells have increased HBS (Sickle HB Allele) concentration due to loss of K, Cl, and water from the cell interior. The **extreme dependence of polymerization kinetics on HbS concentration  implies that these RBCs rapidly sickle when deoxygenated**. Deox leads to formation of HbS polymers. There is a latency phase that precedes the formation of polymer strands and their explosive growth inside the RBC. This latent phase is inversely proportional to the ~15-35th power of HbS concentration. *If the delay time is shorter than the capillary transit time, sickling will occur in capillaries with potential for vaso-occlusion*. OK if the reverse, since the sickling then occurs in venules. One of the distinguishing characteristics of sickle RBC is cell dehydration. Irreversibly sickle cells (ISCs) are more dehydrated and have high HbS concentration, even when oxygen tension is normal. Dehydration is due to loss of cell potassium. 

Blockage of K loss from RBC should reduce HBS concentration and propensity for sickling. Use of K channel inhibitor Clotrimazole (CLT) was recommended. The RBC Gardos channel is inhibited by CLT and other imidazole antimycotics. The Gardos channel is a protein pump that expels intracellular potassium when activated by calcium. The red cells loose water along with calcium. The result is higher HBS concentration (All red cells contain Gardos channel proteins in their membranes. Sickle cells accumulate excessive Calcium that activate the Gardos channel). They confirmed this with a transgenic mouse model for sickle cell disease (SAD mouse). They studied 5 subjects with a starter dose of 10 mg CLT/kg/day for one week. At a dosage of 20 mg CLT/kg/day, all subjects showed Gardos channel inhibition, reduced RBC dehydration, increased cell K+ content, and somewhat increased Hb levels. This does is much lower vs 60-160 used for mycotic infections. 

The H4H initiative article indicates that women and older persons have lower TBW; athletes have relatively higher TBW. The intracellular compartment is the largest (has 2/3rd of TBW). Ingested water appears in plasma and blood cells in about 5 minutes. Water moves freely in the interstitial compartment and moves across cell membranes via **water specific channels, the aquaporins**. Fluid exchanges between compartments are regulated by osmotic and hydrostatic pressure. The body produces a small quanity of water from its metabolic activity, but most of the water comes from diet (food and fluids). Metabolic water is produced by oxidation of hydrogen-containing substrate or energy yielding nutrients. *Lipid oxidation produces the most water per gram*. 107 mL/100 g for lipids vs 55 for Carbs and 41 for proteins. Metabolic water production is about 300 ml/day for sedentary folks increasing to 600 ml/day for strenuous physical activity. But respiratory losses also increases - both balance out each other. Dietary total water intake is the most important source (fluids: 70-80% vs for food of 20-30%). The main stimulus for thirst is an increase in plasma osmalality. the increase is detected by osmoreceptors that lead to thirst sensation. ADH secretion is triggered at a lower threshold. ADH is also stimulated by decreased BP and blood volume, as may occur with hemorrhage. However, ADH is considerably more sensitive to small changes in osmolality vs change in blood volume. 1% vs 10% for a clear increase in ADH. 

* Donaldson, H.H., An interpretation of some differences in the percentage of water found in the central nervous system of the albino rat and due to conditions other than age, *The Journal of Comparative Neurology*, vol. 21, 1911, pp. 161-176, accessed on 7/15/18 [here](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/cne.900210206). 

* Dean III, D.C, et al., Alterations of Myelin Content in Parkinson's Disease: A cross-sectional neuroimaging study, *PLOS ONE*, October 2016, acccessed on 7/15/18 [here](http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0163774). 

* Staff, Water and Hydration: Physiological Basis in Adults, published by Hydration for Health Initiative (H4H) at www.h4hinitiative.com
* Brugnara, C., Red Cell dehydration in pathophysiology and treatment of sickle cell disease, 2000, accesed on 7/15/18 at: http://sickle.bwh.harvard.edu/clt.html

* Wells, J.C.K., et al., Prediction of total body water in infants and children, *Arch Dis Child*, 2005, vol. 90, pp. 965-971. 

* Szebeni, A., et al., Ultrasonography and water content of the liver in chronic diffuse liver
disease, *Acta Med Hung*, vol.. 47, no. 3-4, 1990, pp. 163-170
* Lesis, III,  J.L., About Body Water, Merck Manual, acccessed online on 7/9/8 [here](https://www.merckmanuals.com/home/hormonal-and-metabolic-disorders/water-balance/about-body-water).
* Rosner, B., and Gore, R., Measurement Error Correction in Nutritional Epidemiology based on Individual Foods, with Applications to the Relation of Diet to Breast Cancer, *American J of Epidemiology*, vol. 154, No. 9, 2001, pp. 827-835.
* Basile, C., et al., Total body water in health and disease: Have anthropometric equations any meaning, *Nephrol Dial Transplant*, vol. 23, 2008, pp. 1997-2002.
* Lewis, III, J.L., Water and Sodium Balance, Merck Manual, accessed online on 7/9/18 [here](https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/endocrine-and-metabolic-disorders/fluid-metabolism/water-and-sodium-balance).
* Chan, J., et al., Water, Other Fluids, and Fatal Coronary Heart Disease: The Adventist Health Study, *American J of Epidemiology*, vol. 155, issue 9, May 2002, pp. 827-833.
* Dumont, M., White matter free water content at different stages of Alzheimer's disease, pre-print version, accessed online on 7/9/18 [here](http://scil.dinf.usherbrooke.ca/wp-content/papers/dumont-etal-ismrm18.pdf).
* Ji, F., et al., White matter microstructural and extracellular free water...., Abstract P4-237, *The J of the Alzheimer's Association*, vol. 13, issue 7, supplement pp. P1365, July 2017. Accessed [here](https://www.alzheimersanddementia.com/article/S1552-5260(17)32340-3/fulltext). 

