Chapter 1, by Sandell, L.J., in "Mimicking E..C..M". Title: Matrix Biology: ECM -Building function through complexity
The extracellular matrix (ECM) is the extracellular component that provides structural and biochemical support to nearby cells. It involves the interaction of large and small molecules, is tissue specific, dynamic, changing during development, injury, or disease. It functions to control many *critical parameters of tissue homeostasis and response* such as proliferation, apoptosis, development, and morphogenesis. 

It is a storage for functional molecules (for structural, signaling, and degradation) released later (eg. GF - growth factors that bind to GAGs of proteoglycans such as fibroblast growth factor - FGF). ECM has a genetically distinct collagen, and in combination with other molecules (elastin for skin, aggrecan for cartilage). Highly functional ECM has a low cell to matrix ratio. ECM can resist compression (cartilage), make strong attachments (tendon, ligament), ... , and guide nerve and blood vessels. *Water* is a critical commponent of ECM. It determines tissue volume, space for molecular transport, and offers compressive resistance. Water content, extrafibrillar, is determined by the concentration of proteoglycans and glycoproteins. Hydrodynamic processes involved: osmosis, filtration, swelling, and diffusion. Nonlinear transfer functions (the author calls it 'nonideal') influence these processes and in dynamic events such as viscous dissipation of water over the surface of the polymer chain. 

ECM components: 
* Collagen - the most abundant protein in all multicellular organisms, comes in 28 different forms, with 46 genetically distinct polmer chains (Type1 in skin and bone; Type III in tendon, blood vessels and intestine, Type II in cartilage and vitreous, Type V in cornea and dermis, Type IV in basement membrane, type XIII in endothelial cells and heart). The most abundant ones (types I, II, and III) are 3000 nm long and is made up of uninterrupted *Gly-X (proline)-Y (hydroxy prline)* repeats. Type IV is the same length, but has interruptions of this Gly-X-Y sequence. Three polypeptide chains from a single/multiple genes form a collagen molecule (as a right-handed triple helix). Each protein has functional subdivisions  involved in biosynthesis, fibrillogensis, cross-linking, cell interactions, and degradation. Evolutionarily, collagen arose from a single 54 bp exon encoding 18 AAs that form 6 Gly-X-Y triplets. This exon is duplicated many times to form the fibrillar collagen. Domains were added to support secretion, molecular interactions, and degradation. Promoter and other regulatory elements allow specific genes to be expressed in different tissues. 
* Large Chrondoitin Sulfate Proteoglycans: They have a protein backbone and attached GAG chains. Aggrecan, the major proteoglycan of cartilage, provides for compressibility in cartilgage (smaller amounts in meniscus and tendon). Aggrecan has several chrondoitin sulfate and keratan sulfate side chains, contained in the C-terminal two-thirds of the core protein, while the N-terminal one-third has N-linked carbs and behaves like a globular protein (M= 60K D). This globlular side has affinity for HA (hyaluronan). Many such monomers aggregate bound to a central HA strand. This aggregate is stabilized by a link glycoprotein. Each aggrecan has a MW of 300 KD, with over 100 GAG side chains. This "monomer" attaches via the link protein to HA, making the entire complex > 1M KD. Large proteoglycans have been described in other areas, such as aorta smooth muscles. Aggrecan has three globular domains (G1, G2, G3). *Globular proteins are spherical, common, and more water soluble vs fibrous or membrane proteins*. It has two exons for 30 KS (Keratan sulfate) and **100** CS (Chondroitin sulfate) chain attachment. Other large proteoglycans are versican, neurocan, and brevican. 
* Small Proteoglycans: Either small leucine-rich proteoglycan (SLRP) with CS or DS (Dermatan sulfate) side chains or the syndecan with a HS side chain. **SLRP has hydrodynamic and structural roles**, ECM organization, fibrillogenesis and signal transduction, particularly during development, pathophysiology, and tumor growth. *High degree of myopia is associated with intronic variations and SNPs in fibromodulin, proline/arginine-rich and leucine-rich repeat protein (PRELP) and opticin genes*. 

Biosynthesis of ECM macromolecules: ... The secretory machinery of a connective tissue cell is specialized for a high rate of synthesis of specific ECM molecules and their secretion. **High degree of collagen synthesis during organogenesis and repair leads to high levels of collagen propeptides in serum and urine - can be used as biomarkers of synthesis**. Propeptides help in the alignment of three helix chains. After collagen fibrils are formed, intermolecular cross-links are formed between hydroxylated lysine residues, forming an aldehyde. Complex cross-links are formed in collagen and elasin, and they confer physical and mechanical properties of the fibrils and provide the tensile strength fundamental to the structural role of collagen fibers in connective tissues. The enzyme lysyl oxidase and copper are required to form cross-links. Deficiency in either lead to lathyrism (*poor bone formation and strength, hyperextensible skin, and increased aortic aneurysms*). 

Other Matrix Molecules:
* Heparan Sulfate Proteoglycans: They play key roles during normal development, tissue morphogenesis, and wound healing. They also participate in selective filtration of biological fluids, cellular barriers, and in modulation of angiogenesis. 
* Matricellular Proteins: These modulate cell-matrix ineractions and cell functions, but do not have a structural role. 
* Elastic Tissues: They allow for *repetitive distending/relaxing or passive lengthening/shortening movements endowing the tissues with flexibility and rubber-like extensibility*. Elastic fibers occurs as concentric sheets or lamellae in blood vessels. Elastic tissues have elastin predominantly, along with fibrillin and a smaller glycoprotein, microfibril-associated glycoprotein (MAGP). A single gene encodes elastin, with alternatively spliced products; Fibrillin is encoded by two genes. *Elastic fibers are extremely inert and difficult to extract from ECM. MMP-12 is a known elastase isolated from macrophages*. 
* Calcified Tissues: Calcification (or biomineralization) involves deposition of hydroxyapatite (calcium biphosphate) in the ECM, primarily on the fibrillar collagen. Physiological in bone. Pathological in soft tissues such as tendon, kidney, blood vessels, and snyovial joints. So, this must be carefully and critically regulated. Hypertrophic chrondocytes produce the enzymes necessary to remodel the matrix, mainly MMP13 and MMP9 (*Matrix Metalloproteinses*)

Surprises in the ECM - Latent functions of matrix molecules: 
* Degradative Enzymes in the ECM: MMPs and ADAMs. Enzymnes resident in the ECM help with normal turnover and matrix degradation. In some cases, this balance is lost, matrix is destroyed (eg. osteorthritis). Tumors destroy matrix barriers, allowing invasion into the connective tissues, and metastasis to distant organs. MMPs have a specific group of 25 enzymes and depend on metal ions for catabolic activity to degrade structural ECM proteins. They include domains for secretion, propeptide (latently), and catalysis. MMP activationis tightly controlled to prevent tissue damage. *Normally, MMP's activity is very weak; increases rapidly under inflammatory and oxidative stimuli*. MMPs are activated in ECM. 
* Matrixins - Matrikines and Matricryptins. Once ECM is formed, the matrix action begins. It is highly responsive and communicative with the cells and other parts of the tissue. Bioactive fragments are released from full-length proteins by limited proteolysis from enzymes such as cathepsins, plasminogen activator/plasmin system, and MMPs. These fragments provide new activities different from those of the intact molecule. MMP-2/7/13 produce **endostatin**, an anti-angiogenic peptide from type XVII. *MMP-7/9/12 produce [elastokines](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18206415)*. The releas and activity of these fragments provides an additional level of regulation to the ECM, modulating for *angiogenesis, cancer, fibrosis, inflammation, neuro-degenerative diseaases, and wound healing*. May be useful as therepeutic agents. **Oligosacchs clearved from HA also belong to the matricryptin family and promote inflamation and improve wound healing. Collagens and proteoglycans, elastin, and laminins are major sources of matrikines. Elastin peptides regulate insulin resistance in mice**. Endotrophin from Type IV Collagen secreted by adipocytes, has a role in obesity-related cancers. 
* Growth Factors: They reside in ECM either by binding to protein or to negatively charged carb chains. Cells produce them at a certain time and are stored in the ECM for later use. Cartilage GAGs **do not participate in water flow resistance in cartilage (?)**, but bind growth factors. Heparin in the matrix and bloodstream also binds to growth factors. The angiogenic growth factor VEGF is stored extracellularly bound to ECM. 

**Conclusions**: ECM is dynamic, responsive, and widely present. Specific combinations of molecules provide for ECM specialization. ECM can initiate and respond to mechanical forces, development, injury, and disease, and if not controlled properly can **participate in progression of disease**. Tissue engineering - construct a matrix that has functional properties and environmentally responsive (homeostasis/injury). Engineered release of bioactive peptides is a consequential result. 
