From Chapter 2, "Matrix Biology: Gradients and Patterns within the Extracellular Matrix" by Domowicz, M., Cortes, M., and Schwartz, N.B.

*Introduction*: Secreted signaling molecules from certain cell groups act at short and long range cells. For the latter, a quantitative concentration gradient is formed by these molecules (called **morphogens**). This is critical and useful in embryonic development. They rmain active in differentiated (mature) tissues, to support their survival, maintain their stem cell niches, or to stimulate tissue regeneration and cell replacement. *Morphogen polypeptide families*: hedgehogs (HH), wingless (Wnts), epidermal Growth Factors (EGF), fibroblast Growth Factors (FGF) and transforming Growth factors (TGF) and metabolites such as t-RA (*trans*-retinoic acid. They have distinct mechanisms of action influenced by their stability and *specific interactions with specific components of the ECM*. No unified model on gradient formation, but there are explanations. Simple diffusion is modulated by receptor composition of the target cells and morphogen recycling, degradation, post-translational modifications. Three models of positional information are explained here: 1. Cell specification in the Neural Tube. Gradients of SHH secreted from NC (notochord) and FP (floor plate) and Wnt/BMP secreted from RP (roof plate) induce concentration-dependent differentiation of pre-cursor cells (pDL1-pV3) along the dorsoventral axis. 2. Limb bud development: Most frequently used to study patterning. Gradients of SHH are initiated by cells in the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA) while FGGs are expressed by cells in the apical ectodermal ridge (AER). SHH activates gremlin (BMP antagonist) which in turn maintains FGF expression in the AER. FGF expression maintains proliferation by promoting SHH activity. (3) Morphogens regulating growth plate development. It is a superb model system - morphogens specifically influence the proliferation and differentiation of a single cell type, the chondrocyte. ECM composition is also established, thereby allowing one to understand ECM's influence on gradient formation. 

Movement of signaling molecules: Restricted (passive) diffusion due to lysosomal degradation and matrix binding (and consequent immobilization) of morphogens may occur. Intracellular vesicle-mediated active transport also exists. Lipoprotein particle with morphogen could be secreted and distributed across several cell lengths. Also direct contact to nearby cells for both signal transmission and reception, by thin cellular filopodia (cytonemes) is a more recent discovery. 

Interactions with ECM: ECM composition determines the gradient shape and range. Structural changes (deformability and stiffness) also matter. Secreted structural components of the ECM can diffuse from their site of synthesis and assemble into matrices at a distance from their biosynthetic sites. They modify the matrix composition as they migrate. All this will influence morphogen gradient. 

Morphogens and ECM molecules: (1) PG (*proteoglycans*) have a core protein with attached high-molecular weight glycosaminoglycan chains (GAGs) consisting of repeating sulfated disacchs (chondroitin, dermantan, heparan, and keratan - CS, DS, HS, and KS, respectively). Combination GAGs also exist. Part-time PGs have the GAG spliced out. PGs can modulate cell proliferation, differentiation, and migration, possibly due to their ability to influence protein gradient formation and signal transduction. N- and O- sulfation gives GAGs distinct affinities with specific ligands. *FGF, TGF-β, PDGF, VFGF, Wnt, and HH* bind strongly with HS and heparin (a highly sulfated GAG of HS type). FGF are classified as paracrine, endocrine, and intracrine. Paracrine FGFs bind with HS, forming action gradients, while endocrine FGFs bind with HS at low affinity and thus can diffuse to the bloodstream. HS, via dimerization, helps in paracrine FGF diffusion between signaling and receiving cell. *There is increasing evidence* that morphogens bind with ECM core proteins directly, without GAG involvement. Morphogen gradient must be coordinated with standard ECM receptors (integrins and discodin domain receptors).

Artificial matrices: During the past decade, multiple approaches have been tried to incorporate in tissue-engineered scaffolds, synthetic and semi-synthetic polymers, called neoPGs, that mimic the structural and biological functions of PGs. *The major challenges* are the dual composition of PGS (core protein + carbs), the limited knowledge of carb structures that actively bind to specific morphogens, and limitations in performaing carb sequential syntheses to generate large matrices for clinical purposes. Some of have been used for promoting angiogenesis, osteogenic and cartilage differentiation,and for growth of cartilage, cardiovascular, and bone tissues. Methods for controlled release of morphogens from ECM-like scaffolds for use in regenerative medicine are also being explored. 


