Summary of Chapter 3: "Matrix Biology: ECM Turnover and Temporal Fluctuation" by Tran, Q., and Ogle, B.M.. 

ECM Dynamics in the myocardium: Heart tube is generated first, with an inner endothelial layer and an outer muscular layer. next, a looping process that forms the atrial and ventricular portions and then chambers. The myocardium is distinguished as epi, myo, and endo regions. Cardiomyocytes migrate, proliferate, differentiate, and organize to generate a highly structured myocardium that can generate physical and electrical impulses. Cells fro the preepicardial organ migrate and generate the embryonic epicardium. They transition to mesenchymal cells, migrate to myocardium, and differentiate into cardiac fibroblasts. They are the main source of ECM and contribute to mechanical, biochemical, structural, and electrical activities of the heart. Epicardial cells also differentiate into vascular SMC and endothelial cells of the heart, especially within the coronary vascular network. *Myocardiogenesis*: The myocardium is mechanically stimulated with each heart beat. Myocardium must be *strong enough to sustain tensile load and elastic enough to recoil following extension*. This is achieved (in part) with ECM - it has fibrillar collagens (types I, III, V, and XI) and proteins associated with elastic fibers. **Collagen is the most abundant ECM within the body** and plays a major role in the tensile strength of tissues. Collegen proteins composed of triple helices with high concentration of *glycine (Gly), proline (Pro), and hydroxyproline* AAs that self-organize into fibrils and fibers. Hydroxyproline is formed by **hydroxylation** of proline as a post-translational modification. It is 4% of all AAs found in animal tissue, at higher amount than 7 AAs translationally formed. Collagen is generically shown as X-Y-Gly AA triad. A Pro in the Y position is hydroxylated (Hyp) which increases the stability of the collagen triple helix. This increase in stability is not due to water molecules, but is explained based on stereoelectronic effects. *Hydration provides little or no additional stability. Elastin also has collagen-like domains with Hyp*.  Collagen I is evident in the epicardium of the mouse by 2d (after birth). Collagen III null mice have reduced number of Collagen I fibrils. Elastic fibers enable heart recoil. Elastin is the primary component of the elastic fiber and is rich in hydrophobic AAs, which tend to aggregate until tension is applied. *Elastin fibers* comprise of crosslinked elastin molecules and microfibril containing *glycoproteins such as fibrillins and fibulins*. Elastin expression peaks at 16.5 ED (*embryonic day*, in mice) and in the epicardium 2d after birth. Fibrillin-1 is detected at ED 10.5, spcifically with endothelial and epithelial cells (...). Increase in elastin at mid-late gestation is thought to be in support of heart recoil. Soon after birth, there is a relative decrease in elastin. *MCP* (multicellular proteins) are non-structural proteins tha contain binding sites for structural ECM proteins, cell surface receptors, and growth factors. Thrombospondin, an MCP, has three identical subunits linked through disulfide bonds. Fibronectin, another MCP, peaks early (ED 11) and has roles in cell migration and collagen I fibril organization. *Proteoglycans* are ECM proteins with a core protein with 1+ GAGs attached. They interact with other PGs, GAGs, ECM proteins, **cations (sodium and potassium), and water** and generally serve to lubricate the extracellular space. Versican, a PG with CS, is involved in trabeculae formation in the myocardium, along with modulation from fibulin-1, ADAMTS-1 and 9. *GAGs* are polysacch chains, found in association with proteins or free floating. GAGs affect cell behavior through interaction with GFs, enzymes, cytokines present in EC space. *HA* is an anionic, non-sulfated GAG. (Some general info:  distributed throughout connective, epithelial, and neural tissues; its' MW can reach into millions. An avearge person (70Kg) has 15 g of HA and 1/3rd is tuned over every day. it is a polymer of disacchs, composed of D-glucuronic acid and N-acetyl-D-glucosamine, linked via alternating β-(1→4) and β-(1→3) glycosidic bonds. Can have 25 K repeats, with molecular weights of 5 K to 20 M Da). During mouse cardiac development HA is found in the interstitial space near cardiomycytes. Has-2 (*HA synthase-2*) is seen in the myocardium and endocardium at ED 8.5. Has-2 null mice are devoid of trabeculae. Also, rat embryos cultured in *hyaluronidase* have poorer ventricular function. 

Myocardial disease: MI occurs due to the lack of oxygen supply to cardiomyocytes, causing massive death of these cells. Cardiac healing has four phases: loss of cardiomyocytes; inflammation and ECM degradation and clearning of cell and ECM debri; granulation tissue formation with activated fibroblasts, macrophages, new blood vessels, and ECM proteins; and generation of an acellular, collagen-rich scar. Syndecan (a HS PG), has maximal expression 7 days after MI. In Syndecan-null mice, Pro-MMP -2 and 9 are increased relative to wild-type mice. *MMPs* (matrix metalloproteinases) are a family of zinc-based peptidases that specifically degrade ECM proteins. These null mice have a higher rate of cardiac dilation and increased (and disorganized) collagen production. Overexpression of syndecan-1 reduces cardiac inflammation and dilation, improves collagen org. Syndecan-1, thus, has a role in infarct inflammation, healing, and cardiac dilation. Syndecan-4 is involved in granulation, fibroblast differentiation, and angiogenesis. The possibility of avoiding scar formation is the holy grail of myocardial healing post MI. Protease inhibition may facilitate that. 

ECM Dynamics of Cardiac Valves: Complete notes at a later date. Calcific aortic valve disease (CAVD): In CAVD, collagen accumulation within the AV is increased and disorganized relative to a healthy valve.  Elastin in the normal value is organized in radially aligned fibers. In CAVD, there is a loss of elastin fiber content and organization. PGs and GAGs, in the normal valve, are located within the spongiosa layer. In disease, PGs and HA accumulation is increased. Versican ahd HA are found in tissues around the large calcific nodules. This disrupts the collagen and elastin network within the valve... 

ECM Dynamics of the Vasculature: *Vascular Development*: Normal vessles contain endothelial cells, SMC, pericytes, and ECM proteins organized into concentric layers. The intima has endothelial cells with some PG and HA. The media is separated from the intima by an elastic membrane and is composed of SMC, elastic fibers, collagen, and PGs. The Adventita is also separated from the media by an elastic membrane and is comprised of fibroblasts and collagen. *ECM in vasculogenesis*: collagen I, III, V, and VI are most expressed in the aorta during development. Peaks dramatically at ED 14, with high expression until 10 d post-birth. After this, expr rapidly decreases and continues to fall during the adult years. In the media, collagen I is near VSMC, but not near elastic laminae. Collagen III is near the laminae; collagen V is all through the medial layer. Recoil after distention is critical: elastin mRNA expression increases from ED to 14 days post-birth, decreasing after that. Fibrillin-1 peaks after birth, declining later. Fibrillin-2 is highest early ED and decreases throughout development... Discussion on fibulin... Fibrillin proteins help generation of a native embryonic elastin network that matures during post-birth. *Basement membrane*: Laminin-1 appears early in development; Laminin-8 is seen late in embryonic stages and into fetal stages. SLRPs (small leucine rich PGs) modulate the proliferation and migration of VSMC during vasculogenesis. *Temporal distribution of ECM proteins*: either sustained or dynamic expression. fibronectin, laminin, and collagen IV are seen early in the embryo and persist into adult life. This may be due to their role cell attachment and org of the vasculature. Proteins of collagen and elastin network are expressed dynamically, with c and e protein expression peaking during the juvenile stage, while 'helper' proteins are expressed earlier during the embryonic stages. Continued expr of c and e indicate further maturation and org of the network due to the change in mech requirements of the vasculature after birth. 

