AGE (Advanced Glycation Endproducts) is a recent focus. [Glycation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glycation), also called non-enzymatic glycosylation, results from bonding of glucose or fructose to a protein or lipid molecule. It is a haphazard process, not enzymatic, does not need ATP, and impairs functioning of proteins and lipids. Glycosylation, in contrast, is a functional enzyme-mediated ATP-based attachment of sugars to protein to define sites. Exogenous glycations and AGEs are formed when sugars are cooked with  proteins or fats, at higher temperatures or longer cooking. About 10% are absorbed by the body. Browned food (eg. French Fries) is evidence (they enhance flavors and add colors). Recent work shows that these products are important contributors to inflammation and disease. Endogenous glycation occurs in blood to a small part of the absorbed simple sugars (glucose, fructose, and galactose). Fructose has 10* glycation activity vs glucose. Glycation is the first step, through Amadori/Schiff base/Mallard reactions, which lead to AGEs. Some AGEs are benign. Others are implicated in age related diseases such as **cardiovascular diseases** (the endothelium, fibringogen, and collage are damaged), Alzheimer's disease, cancer, and peripheral neuropathy (myeline is impacted). Long-lived cells (nerve and brain cells), long-lasting proteins (crystallins of the eye), and DNA may accumulate much damage with aging. Retinal and beta cells are at high risk of damage. *Damage of glycation results in stiffening or weakening of the collagen in the blood vessel walls* leading to HT or aneurysm. RBCs are easily accessible for measurement of glycated HB. Measure HbA1c - the predominant form of glycated Hb. Discussion at the Wiki site on Fructose: European Food Safety Authority prefers fructose to sucrose (glucose bonded to fructose) and glucose because of the glycemic index post food intake, but warns against high frucose intake due to dyslipidaemia, insulin resistance, and increased visceral adiposity. UK's Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition in 2015 disputed this claim on this aspect of high fructose consumption (implication: it may be the high calori intake of excessive consumption of sugar-sweetened foods). Fructose is the sweetest of naturally occuring carbs (~1.5 * that of sucrose). Relative sweetness reduces with warming. Apple and pear juice have high concentration of free fructose and may cause diarrhea in children. Sugar, Caramel, Maple syrup, and Molasses have high Sucrose contnent (50-100%, on dry basis). Sugar Cane and Beet have high Sucrose content. From the Wik article on AGE: Vit C and aspirin inhib AGE formation in the lab. No agent is known that can break down the most common AGE, glucosepane, which appears 10 to 1000 more often than other cross-linking AGE. AGEs cause damage through cross-linking that causes intracellular damage and apoptosis. Cross-link is a bond that links one polymer chain to another. Proteins present in the body contain crosslinks that help provide mechanically stable structures such as hair, skin, and cartilage. *In Atherosclerosis, AGEs induce crosslinking of collagen, leading to potential vascular stiffening*. Crosslinking is measured by **swelling** experiment (the sample is placed in a good solvent - the more crosslinking the less will be the swelling). 

I will provide a summary of recent (2014+) articles in another essay here. Refs will be noted there. 
